source/04_Sets_and_Functions.rst, before:

.. _sets_functions_and_relations:

Sets and Functions
==================

The vocabulary of sets, relations, and functions provides a uniform
language for carrying out constructions in all the branches of
mathematics.
Since functions and relations can be defined in terms of sets,
axiomatic set theory can be used as a foundation for mathematics.

Lean's foundation is based instead on the primitive notion of a *type*,
and it includes ways of defining functions between types.
Every expression in Lean has a type:
there are natural numbers, real numbers, functions from reals to reals,
groups, vector spaces, and so on.
Some expressions *are* types,
which is to say,
their type is ``Type``.
Lean and mathlib provide ways of defining new types,
and ways of defining objects of those types.

Conceptually, you can think of a type as just a set of objects.
Requiring every object to have a type has some advantages.
For example, it makes it possible to overload notation like ``+``,
and it sometimes makes input less verbose
because Lean can infer a lot of information from
an object's type.
The type system also enables Lean to flag errors when you
apply a function to the wrong number of arguments,
or apply a function to arguments of the wrong type.

Lean's library does define elementary set-theoretic notions.
In contrast to set theory,
in Lean a set is always a set of objects of some type,
such as a set natural numbers or a set of functions
from real numbers to real numbers.
The distinction between types and set takes some getting used to,
but this chapter will take you through the essentials.

.. include:: 04_Sets_and_Functions/01_Sets.rst

.. include:: 04_Sets_and_Functions/02_Functions.rst

Commit message:

sets and function: add Schroeder Bernstein theorem

source/04_Sets_and_Functions.rst, after:

.. _sets_functions_and_relations:

Sets and Functions
==================

The vocabulary of sets, relations, and functions provides a uniform
language for carrying out constructions in all the branches of
mathematics.
Since functions and relations can be defined in terms of sets,
axiomatic set theory can be used as a foundation for mathematics.

Lean's foundation is based instead on the primitive notion of a *type*,
and it includes ways of defining functions between types.
Every expression in Lean has a type:
there are natural numbers, real numbers, functions from reals to reals,
groups, vector spaces, and so on.
Some expressions *are* types,
which is to say,
their type is ``Type``.
Lean and mathlib provide ways of defining new types,
and ways of defining objects of those types.

Conceptually, you can think of a type as just a set of objects.
Requiring every object to have a type has some advantages.
For example, it makes it possible to overload notation like ``+``,
and it sometimes makes input less verbose
because Lean can infer a lot of information from
an object's type.
The type system also enables Lean to flag errors when you
apply a function to the wrong number of arguments,
or apply a function to arguments of the wrong type.

Lean's library does define elementary set-theoretic notions.
In contrast to set theory,
in Lean a set is always a set of objects of some type,
such as a set natural numbers or a set of functions
from real numbers to real numbers.
The distinction between types and set takes some getting used to,
but this chapter will take you through the essentials.

.. include:: 04_Sets_and_Functions/01_Sets.inc

.. include:: 04_Sets_and_Functions/02_Functions.inc

.. include:: 04_Sets_and_Functions/03_The_Schroeder_Bernstein_Theorem.inc
